Curt Jaimungal: So let's talk about physical philosophy versus the philosophy of physics. People have heard about the philosophy of physics. What is physical philosophy?

Jacob Barandes: Yeah, so my research has sort of two sides. There's the physical philosophy side,and there's the philosophical physics side. Let me start with physical philosophy. So the way Idescribe physical philosophy, it's the use of results and ideas and discoveries and theoriesfrom physics to address traditional questions in philosophy, in particular in metaphysics. So thekinds of questions that we're interested in here are questions about space and time, the philosophyof time, causation. There are very interesting connections between physics and causation, someof which we'll hopefully have a chance to talk about today. Also the philosophy of probability,which is a very subtle and very complicated area. And also the metaphysics of laws, which is a rich,very interesting area of inquiry. And so just thinking about what do our best current physical theories bring to bear on these traditional questions? How do they constrain whatwe can say about those sorts of things? So here's a good example, a concrete example. Philosophers, metaphysicians have been thinking about the nature of time for a very, very long time, right? You go back to Parmenides and Heraclitus and people thinking about, you know,is time something that flows? Is time something that is just an illusion? And there's this veryfamous paper, which maybe you can link to because it's a beautiful paper and people should read it,by McTaggart, a philosopher, about over 100 years ago on the nature of time. He introducesthis terminology, the A series, the B series, the C series, these different ways of thinkingabout time and how much structure it has, right? The A series is this idea that events that takeplace in time can be classified as past, present, and future. But that seems to like distinguisha notion of a presence, and is that really a sensible notion? And then there's the B series,which has less structure. This just says that events can only be classified in terms of earlier or later. So there's like a pairwise relationship between them only, and there's no distinguishednotion of a present. And the C series is even less structure. It just says that there's a sense of an ordering of events, that given any three events, we can say which takes place between the othertwo, but without privileging a direction in time. And, you know, he explores all of these ideas inthe essay. But right around the same time, Albert Einstein was developing special relativity,and special relativity has some pretty serious implications for how we think about the natureof time. In particular, although, you know, many people have heard of phenomena like time dilation,the idea that observers moving in different states of motion will, you know, have different sensesin which time flows, like the rate at which time flows for one observer may be different from the rate at which time flows for another. And maybe some people have heard of length contraction orLorentz contraction, that spatial distances in the direction of the change of reference frame can bedistorted. Somewhat less known is the breakdown of simultaneity, which is this idea that observers indifferent states of motion will assign different events to be in their present. So for an observerin one frame of motion, some collection of events may be in what observer identifies as their present moment. But to an observer in a different frame of motion, their sense of thepresent is like tilted. It's like tilted a little bit, so that things that the first observer would have said were in the future are in the second observer's present, as are some things that mighthave been in the first observer's past. And this feature of special relativity that simultaneityis not an invariantly defined concept has profound implications for how we think about the philosophyof time. And these were explored by people like, rather famously, the philosopher Hilary Putnamin the 60s, who wrote a really beautiful paper, which you should also link to because it's justvery beautifully argued. And he makes the case for what he calls four-dimensionalism, you might callit eternalism, the idea that because different observers will disagree on which events are in their presence, if we just take the totality of all the things that everybody thinks are intheir present, it's basically all of space-time. If you look at observers at different locations, different frames of motion, and does that mean that everything in space-time is just in somesense there already? You know, the future is not a thing that has yet to happen, the future is not athing that is unfolding, but our experience of the flow of time is merely psychological. And special relativity is actually telling us, in some very strong sense, that we're living in an eternalistso-called block universe where everything is just there. So this is a fantastic example of where thethings we're learning from contemporary successful physical theories, thoroughly empiricallyestablished, like physical theories, bring to bear some very important constraints on whatyou might have thought were purely metaphysical questions. So I call this general subject physicalphilosophy. On the other hand, I also work in what I would call philosophical physics, and the name is supposed to resemble like... Theoretical physics, mathematical physics,computational physics, it's a methodology for doing physics, not philosophy. But rather than, say, mathematical physics, where you're doing physics by stating axioms and proving theorems,or theoretical physics, where you're formulating models and then calculating predictions within themodels and comparing them with experiments, or computational physics, where you're simulatingphysical processes in a computer. And making predictions that way. Philosophical physicstries to make progress on physics using some of the tools that you might traditionally have associated with philosophy. So what are those kinds of tools? Thought experiments, coming upwith counter-examples, sharpening definitions, sharpening questions, right? Sometimes you'redealing with a problem in science, or physics more specifically, where the questions are not yetsharply formed enough that you could subject them to experimental study. Sometimes you have to dosome work beforehand to sharpen those questions, that's the kind of thing that philosophers like todo. Identifying implicit assumptions, hidden assumptions, and that's something we'll be talking about because some of my work is closely connected with this idea of identifying implicitassumptions. Assumptions that may get in the way of making scientific progress. Subjectingideas to logical analysis, and also to what I call rigorous scrutiny. Because in philosophy,we're not generally guided by empirical data or observation. You might think that there's just,well, if you don't have empirical data, what are you doing? Well, you're not without any tools at all, right? So one of the things that philosophers like to do is just be really, really careful inhow they talk about things and how they define things. Being very careful with every step of their logic, stating their premises as clearly as possible so that if you find fault with theirarguments, you can identify where the problem is. So just sharpening everything and subjecting things to rigorous scrutiny. These are all tools and techniques that come from philosophy, and Icall them philosophical physics. And this doesn't even include just taking ideas from philosophy, like actual just picking up ideas from philosophy and seeing if they have some use in physics. AndI think there's a proud tradition of this kind of work. I've talked to philosophers of science who've told me that the greatest philosopher of physics of the 20th century was Albert Einstein.And when you look at especially Einstein's earlier work, what is he doing? He's subjectingdefinitions and ideas to rigorous scrutiny. I mean, how much time did he spend trying to pindown exactly what we mean by an inertial reference frame? You might think inertial reference frames are like the scenery of Newtonian physics. Like, what could you really gain by spending a lot oftime really rigorously scrutinizing what is the precise definition of an inertial reference frame and scrutinizing when you know that you're actually in an inertial reference frame? Butthink about how much mileage Einstein got out of thinking about inertial reference frames, which laws of physics should be the same in every inertial reference frame, realizing that the speedof light is one of these laws of physics that should be the same in every inertial reference frame. And then, you know, his greatest—what he described as the greatest idea he ever had,which is realizing that, you know, it's impossible to distinguish the local short-duration effects ofa gravitational field from being in a reference frame that is in uniform acceleration. And thatrealization is what, you know, eventually evolves into the equivalence principle and leads himinto his theory of general relativity. He has this idea in 1907, and he described it as the happiest idea of his life. So—and, of course, I'll get into this more a little bit later,but Einstein was thoroughly steeped in philosophy. We'll talk a little bit about the greats of 20th century physics and how much philosophy they did. So I think there's a really a strong tradition ofphilosophical physics in history, and I'm certainly not the only one who practices,I think, this discipline, but I think there's really something to say about it. I think itreally does contribute something to how we can make progress in physics, and so that's the other side, I think, of what I do.

Curt Jaimungal: So what's the standard view of philosophy of physics or philosophy in general from people who consider themselves to be scientists or who actually are practicing scientists? So, for instance, when I was speaking to Neil deGrasse Tyson,he was saying, well, philosophy, what has it done? Give me, Curt, an example of somethingthat philosophy has contributed to modern-day physics in the past 30 years. Sure, in the past,thought experiments.

Jacob Barandes: That's a lovely question. I actually know Neil Tyson. We worked together when I was in high school. This is some interesting history. So I grew up in New York City, and I usedto go to the Museum of Natural History all the time. It was one of my favorite places. I mean, if anyone who's listening to this has never been to the American Museum of Natural History,you are missing out. It's like going to a magical fairyland for science, and it's amazing. And Igot lucky when I was in high school to intern at the museum. And there was a period of time whenI was working in the astronomy department, and I worked with Neil Tyson. It was amazing. I mean,he's great. So, of course, I do very, very politely disagree with that sentiment.I'll give you a couple of examples. So here are some things that have come out of philosophical thinking about physics, philosophy. I mean, the lines are a little blurry here, because obviously,if you're doing philosophy that's very close to physics, one could accuse you of just doing physics. But, okay, let me think of an example. This one is from the 80s, okay? So 1982,Zurich and Wouters, and then independently, an absolutely, definitely philosopher of science,Dennis Deeks, independently formulated what we now call the no-cloning theorem. So no-cloning theorem in quantum theory is a very simple, very beautiful theorem. What it says is that if you're given,as traditionally formulated, a quantum state in the form of a wave function or state vector,just some object in Hilbert space that describes, in a traditional sense, the state of your quantum system, and you don't do any measurements on it. You've prepared it,but you haven't, like, measured the position or whatever, you're just, you're leaving it pristine. Is there a way to build some kind of apparatus that can make another system be in exactlythe same quantum state? That is, can you, you know, if your first system was, um... you know, some simple quantum system and it's in some state, can you bring in a second quantum systemof the same kind and run both systems through some kind of machine that will make the second systembe in the same quantum state as the first system every time? Right, every time? And the answer is,you can't. If you set the machine up so that it works some of the time, then all you have to dois set up the first system in a superposition of those possibilities, and what you'll find is that you cannot get the other system to be in the right quantum state that is also the same superposition.This is called the no-cloning theorem. And the no-cloning theorem is useful. I mean, people certainly, it shows up all over the place in physics, it shows up in high-energy theory,it shows up in all kinds of places. I guess that's 1982. I mean, that's a little bit outside the boundary of the 30 years. What's happened since the 90s? I mean, that's an interesting question. I mean, from the point of view of like, so it's a bit difficult because, like I said, the boundarieshere are a little blurry. If you think about people like Martin Lizord or Eric Uriel or J.B.Manchek, these are people who work in foundations of general relativity. And, you know, their workis super mathematical. I mean, if you ask them, do you consider yourself first and foremost aphilosopher? Or I haven't asked Eric or I haven't asked all these people like, what do you first think of yourself as? But they certainly come to philosophy seminars, they give philosophy talks,they certainly sound like philosophers. And they're doing like work on general relativity.They're proving things about space-time that are interesting facts. So I, you know,and then of course, the lines between quantum foundations and quantum information are also very blurry. So I'll tell you, here's an interesting story, okay? You've all probably heard of qubits,right, qubit, right? So a qubit is supposed to be a quantum bit. And usually the way that we're,the term is introduced, people will say it's a portmanteau of quantum and bit, right? Bit,I think the term bit goes back to Claude Shannon. That itself is a portmanteau of binary digits. You know, Claude Shannon introduced many of the ideas in information theory and communication theory inthe 40s, back when he was at Bell Labs. And then the idea is that you have classical bits and youalso have these modern quantum bits or qubits. But the name qubit is a very, it's a very funny word,because if you look at it, it's spelled Q-U-B-I-T. You'd be hard pressed to think of many other wordsin English that are a Q and a U and then there's no other vowel, just a constant right away. Whythat very funny spelling? And I'm not saying I'm the first to notice this funny spelling. In fact, there's a very famous physicist, David Merman, who also is interested in quantum foundations,among other things. And he doesn't like that spelling because he says it's grammatical, it'slike the spelling is really very non-standard. I think he likes to write it as Q hyphen bit andnot Q-U-B-I-T. So where did that spelling come from? The term was coined by Ben Schumacher atKenyon College and Bill Wooters, who I mentioned before, at Williams College. The story is thatBill Wooters was visiting Kenyon College and this was in Ohio. And they were both driving to theairport in Columbus. And they were talking about how they needed a new scheme for talking aboutquantum information. This was in 1992, just outside of the 30-year mark. I'm sorry, we're just a little over 30 years. And it was Bill. So I got this information from one of Ben's students,Mary Gerhardinger, she told me the story. Bill was in the car and he said, wouldn't it be funnyif we called these things qubits because there's a unit of measure in the Bible called a qubit. Butin the Bible, it's spelled C-U-B-I-T. It's a unit of measure. It's like, I don't know, a distancefrom your elbow to the tip of your finger. And if you read Genesis, right, you'll hear God tellingNoah to build the ark and it's supposed to be this many qubits long and this many qubits tall, right? And they're like, but it starts with a C because the Bible is classical, do you getit? Like what's more classical than the Bible? Let's just replace the C with a Q and it will be a modern version of a qubit. That's funny. And they both thought it was hilarious. And so the name comes from this conversation that they had. And, you know, Bill Wooters did a lot of work in quantum foundations. Ben Schumacher worked with John Wheeler, who, in addition to being a very great theoretical physicist and a fantasticmentor who had many, many famous students, Richard Feynman, one of the students, so many students,Jacob Bekenstein, many very famous students, was also very philosophically curious. HughEverett of the Many Worlds Interpretation, which hopefully we'll talk about, was also one of his students. And so he really enjoyed having these really deep philosophical conversations. And hecreated a real atmosphere of philosophical inquiry in his research group. Zurich worked with JohnWheeler. So does that count as a philosophical contribution? I mean, Schumacher and Wooterswere not at R1 universities. They were not at major universities. They were both at liberalarts colleges, and they were interested in very foundational questions. I mean, doesthat count as philosophy? It's kind of hard to say. But now I guess you can go farther. I mean,if you're willing to go farther back and take ideas that came out of philosophical thinking, but that are still proving themselves to be super useful, there's a lot more, right? I mean,you could, I mean, if you're just talking about quantum mechanics, not even general relativity, you know, the notion of entanglement goes back to philosophical disputes between, you know,people like Schrodinger and Einstein. The Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paper from 1935,maybe the most cited paper Einstein's name is on, is an extended philosophical argument.They lay out their premises. They lay out a very detailed philosophical argument, which we can talk about. And, you know, they make a metaphysical claim about quantum mechanics,a physical and a metaphysical claim about whether quantum mechanics could be considered complete, even if it's practically perfectly useful. Their work, you know, the EPR argument,the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paper inspired a lot of people. I'll get to who it inspired,but let me just say that before I get to that, there's a paper by absolutely a philosopher,Greta Hermann. So Greta Hermann was a philosopher, a student of Emmy Noether, who, mathematician,made major contributions to physics, symmetries and conservation laws. Noether's theorem is super important, arguably the most important theorem in physics. And so her student, Greta Hermann,she's a philosopher, she's a neo-Kantian, and she wrote a large number of papers on physics andmetaphysics and on the developing quantum theory. And she wrote a paper, we read it in my philosophyof quantum mechanics class, and it's a paper in which she is studying the nature of causation inquantum mechanics. And she sets up this thought experiment. It's a beautiful thought experiment, and the paper was published in 1935, several months before the EPR paper. It was widely read,apparently. It's likely that Einstein read this paper. And the thought experiment that's usedin the EPR paper bears a strong resemblance to the thought experiment that's in Greta Hermann's paper. Okay, so, like, you know, clear, interesting threads going on in the 1930s. Then,of course, John Bell picks up the thread and publishes a paper in 1964, his famous no-gotheorem paper, the first appearance of what we now call Bell's theorem. And that paper is called Onthe Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox. That's what he calls the paper. He takes the EPR paper andhe extends the argument into a statement about what he calls, what we now call hidden variables theories. You know, and you've got further results that, you know, build on Bell's theorem. You havethe famous C-H-S-H inequality, which comes in 1969. That's Clauser, Horn, Shimony, Holt,which is a somewhat more general version of the Bell inequality in the 90s. So we're in the 90s now. You've got Greenberger, Horn, and Zeilinger, the GHZ paper. There's a beautiful version of thisargument by David Merman in American Journal of Physics, which I can also send you links to. Theseare all beautiful papers to read. And, you know, these papers all deal with entangled systems. Andin particular, Bell's paper and the GHZ paper deal with particular kinds of quantum states. The GHZpaper introduces these GHZ states. And GHZ states show up all over the place in atomic molecularoptical physics today and in quantum information. I feel like every time someone uses a GHZ state oruses, you know, Bell-violating states or things like that in order to do something in quantumcryptography or to certify the randomness of a quantum random number generator, they should have to pay royalties to the field of philosophy of physics and quantum foundations. Theno-signaling theorem is an important result that comes out of quantum foundations. This is in the late 70s and early 80s, I think. One version of the argument is by the same peoplewho gave us the GRW spontaneous collapse theory, right? And, you know, so, you know,and the no-signaling theorem is also a theorem that shows up all over the place. But I think,you know, and I can make more examples. I mean, there's quantum teleportation, you know, in someof David Deutsch's early papers introducing some of the basic ideas that led to quantum computing. He is very explicit in the papers about how what he's trying to do in trying to imagine buildinga quantum computer is confirm that many worlds is the correct interpretation of quantum mechanics, right? So he's motivated by interpretational philosophical questions to a substantial degree.But I think probably my favorite example is decoherence. So whenever you propose a new way tothink about quantum mechanics, people will often say, do we really need this? Doesn't decoherence solve this problem? There's a physics solution to this problem. We don't need philosophy,do we? But decoherence comes out of philosophy, right?

Question: How?

Answer: Okay, so there are some rudiments of ideas from, you know, that we might associate with decoherence that go all the way back to like Mott in the 1920s. But the first serious rigorous formulation of decoherence that I have ever beenable to find shows up in chapter 22. So these are the end chapters of David Bohm's textbook,Quantum Theory. This is 1951, he publishes this textbook. It's before he introduces his pilot wavetheory. And, you know, he's a very philosophically curious person in addition to being a physicist.And in his book on quantum mechanics, he doesn't just wanna teach quantum mechanics. He also wants to deal with some of these lingering questions about how the measurement process is supposedto work. So in the later chapters of his book, he goes through the measurement process in asmuch detail as he is able to based on the axioms that were available, the Dirac-Von Neumann axioms,the axioms associated with Paul Dirac and John Von Neumann from 1930 and 1932 respectively. And,you know, he tries to formulate a measurement process. He has a system, a quantum system thatis to be measured. It's in some superposition. He brings in... Like a physical measuring device,he models the whole thing with a system to be measured and the measuring device. He lets them interact. He ends up with this superposition. And then he argues that someof the probabilistic quantities one might wanna calculate, the averages one might wanna calculate,they exhibit these very strange quantum effects, these so-called interference effects. But once themeasurement proceeds far enough and the measuring device interacts sufficiently strongly... And Idon't remember in the book whether he includes the environment or not. I'd have to remember exactly what he does there. But basically, when enough degrees of freedom from the system get involved,you get what he calls... The phrasing he uses is the destruction of interference in the process of measurements. That's what he calls it. The destruction of interference in the processof measurement, which is decoherence. That's, you know, a more extended version of the term decoherence. And that's exactly what decoherence is. So he writes this book. He apparently hasconversations with Albert Einstein about it. This is 1951, 1952. Albert Einstein is still alive at that point. And he has some conversations with Albert Einstein and Albert Einsteinis dissatisfied with his approach. Says he should go work on it a little more. And he goes back andhe independently rediscovers some work that was done by de Broglie in the late 1920s. De Broglie had developed the first sort of early pilot wave theories. Bohm independently redevelopsthese. Eventually he and de Broglie connect. Now we call these theories the de Broglie-Bohm theory, or sometimes it's just Bohmian mechanics. And in this theory, you've got not just the wavefunction evolving in some high dimensional space where the wave functions live, but the wave function is also guiding around these corpuscular particle-like things, the Bohmian particles,the Bohmian projectiles, the Bohmian corpuscles. And one obvious question you could ask is, well,if you have both these projectiles and you have a pilot wave, and Bell and Bohm in these papersspecifically says that the pilot wave is real, metaphysically real to the same extent thatthe particle locations are. Then when you do something like the double slit experiment and you send a pilot wave through these two slits of an experiment, right, and they land on a screen,why doesn't the screen light up in all the places where the wave hits it, right? So the wavediffracts, you get these intensity peaks, these famous interference peaks in the wave function.The projectile is guided to only one of the locations. When you actually run the experiment, you only see one landing site. But the question is, well, but what about the other empty waves,empty shells, the parts of the wave function that land on the screen and don't have a particle in them? Why don't they hit something and do something? And Bohm wrote two papers. Itwas a pair of papers. In the second paper, he goes through the measurement process. He goes through this example. And he basically uses decoherence to explain why we only see onelanding site. So decoherence was developed in this textbook and then put to use almostimmediately in a very applied sense to get his pilot wave theory off the ground and to make it,to show that it was empirically adequate at least for nonrelativistic systems of finitelymany particles. The thread is then picked up again in the 70s by Dieter Zeh, who did somevery deep and important work on decoherence, apparently had some career repercussions for working on such a philosophical foundational area. And then decades later, physicists, practicalworking physicists working with, you know, AMO systems, atomic molecule optical systems,physicists trying to implement real world quantum computers, trying to implement unitary gates andactually get simple quantum computers to work. But even physicists in all kinds of other areas,physicists trying to understand early universe cosmology, physicists trying to understand systems and condensed matter. People are now worrying about decoherence all the time. You read papers,every paper talks about what is the decoherence timescale of this or that. Decoherence is now a major component of what we do in physics today. It's happening all the time right now. And again,I would just say that maybe we should, we should pay some royalties to poor David Bohm, who was run out of the United States. He like, you know, spent a lot of his career in Braziland couldn't get back to the United States. And Zay, who suffered some career repercussions. And there's this attitude that, oh, thinking about foundational philosophical questions is a wasteof time. How could it be a waste of time given all of the fruit that it is, that it has produced? So, you know, I, what I would say is, and this is just a general message to anyone who's thinkingabout how best to contribute to the development of science. The field of philosophy of physics,the field of, I would say, like, the more philosophical side of quantum foundations,because there are also parts of quantum foundations that are much closer to like practical quantum information type stuff. But the sort of more like philosophical side of it,this is an area that has had very few people work on it, right? There are very few permanent tenuretrack academic positions that are devoted to this kind of work. A lot of the people who are doing this work got their academic positions to do something else and then transitioned intothis work. So there's very few people responsible for a lot of these results. There is very little research funding. And so if you were the sort of person watching this and wondering, like,where would funding make the biggest difference in physics? Should we devote more funding to alreadyvery well-funded areas of physics? Would an additional million dollars make a huge difference to some of these areas? I can tell you that, like, philosophy of physics, the intersectionof physics and philosophy, the more philosophical side of quantum foundations, and also the morephilosophical side of the foundations of general relativity and the foundations of, you know, many other important areas of physics, that's where I think every dollar would go very far. So,you know, if you're in the market for endowing professorships, like, that is a way to make a huge impact on the field.

**Question:** Great. Speaking of the foundations of quantum mechanics, are the inconsistent as they stand in textbook quantum theory?

**Answer:** So, if you take textbook quantum theory to be quantum theory as formulated according to the Dirac-Von Nuemann axioms, Again, that's Pual Dirac as he formulated them in 1930 in his famous book: Principles of Quantum Mechanics and Von Nuemann In 1932, with the book Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. People divide the axioms up in various ways. I'll give a super quick, you know,discussion. They say that to every quantum system, we associate a kind of a vector space called a Hilbert space, a space of vectors involving complex numbers. The elements of this vector spaceare called state vectors. Loosely speaking, they can be also called wave functions. There's some terminological nuance around that. And these are supposed to represent, in some sense, the stateof a quantum system. More generally, you have to use what's called a density operator, which is a little more complicated, but we'll put that aside. And then the next axiom is that as time evolves,these quantum states, whether state vectors or wave functions or density matrices, are supposed to evolve according to what's called unitary time evolution. If it's sufficiently smooth and nice,it can be written as a differential equation, an equation that tells you moment to moment in a Markovian way what each next state will be given the present state. We call that differentialequation, when it's for wave functions, we call it the Schrodinger equation. If it's density operators, we call it the Von Neumann equation. And then there's all these axioms of measurements.The observable things that you could measure about a system are represented by operators or matrices,these self-adjoint things called self-adjoint operators matrices. These are the observables of your theory. The possible results you can get when you measure one of them is called aneigenvalue. It's one of the eigenvalues of these operators. The probability with which you'll get that is given by this formula that takes the state, the quantum state of the system, and takes,you know, we call it projection operator, but a piece of this operator. You put them together, it gives you the probability you'll get that result when you do the measurements. And then onceyou've done the measurements, this quantum state of the system is projected or collapses to reflectthe result and ensure that you'll get the same result if you measure it again right away. Those are the traditional Dirac-Von Neumann axioms, and people slice them up in different ways. ButI like to think of them as those five axioms, right? Hilbert spaces, unitary time evolution, observables as self-adjoint operators, the Born rule for probabilities of measurement outcomes,and then collapse. There are problems with these axioms, not when dealing with, you know,microscopic systems. Microscopic systems, things tend to work out pretty well. And when people say quantum mechanics works just great, they mean microscopic systems. If you want to do a tabletopexperiment, an atomic experiment or a laser experiment, you're working with tabletop systems, microscopic systems, theory works great. Works great. If you, you know, if you limit yourselfto these particular examples, what's the problem? If you want to do a particle physics experiment,a high-energy physics experiment, you're, you know, building a giant particle accelerator,you're talking about the Large Hadron Collider or something like that, you have beams of subatomic particles that are flying together, and there's debris that comes out, you collect allthe debris. These are all microscopic systems. Quantum mechanics makes beautiful predictions about these results. So you're not going to see any discrepancies for these kinds of systems,at least to the extent that the Dirac phenomenon axioms give a self-consistent description for microscopic systems, which they appear to do. Perfectly empirically adequate description,the theory works great. So what's the problem? Why does anyone have any issue? We talked before inour last conversation, and I talked about this thought experiment that was proposed, I think,originally by Hugh Everett in his long-form thesis in 1956-57 when he was a graduate student atPrinceton working for John Wheeler. Not the one he ultimately published. He published a shorter version, but in the longer version, he opens it up with a thought experiment that has since beenusually attributed to Eugene Wigner, who was also at Princeton. And we talked about how Wigner had this paper called On the Mind-Body Question in the early 1960s. But in this thought experiment,we imagine trying to do quantum mechanics with a system that is not small. It is not small. It isnot ultra-cold. It is not, you know, pristine. The quantum system is something big enough tobe a measuring device itself or even an observer. So again, this thought experiment is called theWigner's Friend Thought Experiment. Wigner is on the outside of a box. The box is perfectly sealed. Wigner is one observer. Inside the box is Wigner's friend. Wigner's friend is also an observer, a bigsystem, but perfectly sealed inside the box. And Wigner's friend does a measurement on somesuperposed microscopic quantum system inside the box. And now we have a problem because we candescribe the situation in two ways. We can treat Wigner's friend, the person in the sealed box,as a thing that is an observer, that does measurements, and then we're supposed to usethe measurement axioms and the collapse axiom. Or because the person is sealed in a box and thereis a second observer on the outside who has not done a measurement on the box or the contents,maybe we should treat the box and its contents as not subject to the collapse axiom. And now all ofa sudden we have an ambiguity in the middle of the theory. The Dirac phenomenon axioms are simply ambiguous in this circumstance. They don't render a judgment of what you're supposedto do. And when we spoke last time, I laid out a whole menu of possible things you could do, and each of them leads you down a different road, right, for how you would resolve thisproblem. So this is just an inconsistency. And I want to make clear here, there's a differencebetween a theory being unintuitive or exotic or eccentric and a theory being inconsistent. Let megive you an analogy, a real-world analogy. You've got a friend, and your friend islovable and trustworthy and nice and always there for you, but your friend is eccentric,okay? What do you do? What you do is you love your friend, because we all love eccentric people. We're all eccentric to some degree. I'm eccentric. We're all eccentric. We like eccentricpeople. Eccentric people are interesting. They're interesting because they're often surprising and they're creative and you never know what you're going to get, and it's always very interesting,even if it's sometimes, like, confusing what they do. But it's okay, right? They're just eccentric. We like eccentric people, and we've got eccentric physical theories. Newtonian physics, you know,despite its reputation of being, oh, it's Newtonian, it's classical, it's when everything made sense, there's a lot of stuff about Newtonian physics that doesn'tmake a lot of intuitive sense, right? You know, Newtonian physics says that a system,a body in motion will just stay in motion unless it's acted upon by something. It doesn't come torest. That's very unintuitive. We intuitively feel like things should come to rest. Aristotlebelieved that the natural state of all objects was at rest, and in Newtonian physics, it's just not. You need an explanation for why a thing would come to rest. But, you know, there are a lot ofother examples like this in Newtonian physics. We have all this intuition about how circularmotion should work. We have this intuition that when you're, you know, moving water around in a bucket that there's a centrifugal force pulling it in. That's intuitive, but that's, like,not how it really works. Gyroscopes are where all intuition breaks down, right? That's all Newtonianphysics. Newtonian physics is filled with things that are a little bit unintuitive, and things onlyget worse from there. I mean, special relativity is super unintuitive. We talked about time dilation, the idea that the time, like, progresses differently for observers in different frames ofmotion. That what we call all the events that are simultaneous, like, they're all happening now, our notion of now is relative, and the different people will disagree on which events are now andwhich events are in the future and the past. That's very unintuitive. And don't even get me started about general relativity. I love general relativity. I have taught general relativityhere. So we have a graduate-level course in general relativity, Physics 210. It's, like, one of my favorite courses to teach. I've been teaching it for over 10 years. I learn somethingnew about general relativity every time. I'm always surprised. General relativity, that class,is like an eccentric friend. Every time I teach it, it's like you learn something totally new andsurprising. And you're like, really? It really works this way? It really does. So, you know, general relativity is another example of a theory that is just really, really deeply unintuitive.I mean, we always set aside, like, a half hour every time I teach the class just to talk about the weirdness of black holes. And this is just not even, like, when you start worrying about quantumeffects. Just, like, regular treating black holes as classical objects. Black holes are reallyunintuitive in a lot of ways. And so I'll just set aside half an hour. I'll just open the floor, and I'll just ask students to ask me whatever weird questions they have about black holes.Like, a student will be like, if I stick my arm in a black hole, can I pull it out? Or, like, all these weird things you could ask, like, what does it look like if I send someoneto a black hole? Can they ever come? Like, all these, like, weird questions you could ask. So, generosity is super, super unintuitive. So one other course I teach is graduate level electromagnetism. There are a lot of very unintuitive things that happen in electromagnetism also. So it's not that we don't have, like, we don't have theories thatare eccentric, we do. I should say that all of these theories do have places where they break down. The breakdown in a physical theory is called, well, a singularity in a theory.Singularities aren't necessarily geometric point-like things. They're just places where your equations stop working. Electromagnetism has this famous divergence of the self-energyof point particles. Generalitivity famously has singularities. Everyone's heard of the singularities of the Big Bang and black holes and various other places where generalitivity breaksdown. Newtonian mechanics has weird singular behavior in certain kinds of systems. Yep, yep.There's a famous paper by Shia in the 1990s on a five-body system that exhibits singular behavior.It was originally predicted that this could exist by Poincaré, I think, a century earlier. So all these theories have places where they break down. And what do we do as philosophers,as scientists, as physicists, whatever? We look at these theories and we go, okay, the theories work in these regimes. Sometimes they make very unintuitive claims or predictions, and we're okaywith that. We like weird, cool physics, as long as it's self-consistent. And there are certain places in which the theory breaks down, and we'll need to either replace the theory with somethingelse if we're lucky, if we're unlucky, maybe we won't find a better theory that will replace it, whatever. Quantum mechanics is kind of like that, right? There are regimes in which you're workingwith microscopic systems, and quantum mechanics is nice and self-consistent. We don't run into these ambiguities or inconsistencies. It's a little unintuitive in some of these situations,sure. But when you confront something like the Wigner's Friend thought experiment, and other thought experiments people have proposed over the years, now you're talking not aboutthings being unintuitive. You're talking about a singularity in the theory, you're talking about an inconsistency, you're talking about something where the theory is just broken. No one would say,well, the self-energy of a point particle electromagnetism is just unintuitive. Peoplewould say, this is clearly something wrong that we need to fix. And all I'm saying is the same thing is true of quantum mechanics. There are regimes in which it works well, and there areother situations that we can extrapolate it to where things seem to break down. These situationsdo entail an extrapolation of the theory from microscopic physics to macroscopic physics. I mean, we're assuming you can go from the level of an angstrom, 10 to the negative 10 meters,that's 10 billionths of a meter, all the way up to a one meter scale, the size of a human. To get theWigner's Friend thought experiment, you have to have an extrapolation of the theory to that size. Either you can do that extrapolation and you run into the Wigner's Friend problem, or you can't,but if you can't, well, then there must be some other place where the theory breaks down. In any event, something goes wrong, and we just have to deal with that. We have to confront that problemand manage it. But I would go a step farther than that. It's not just that the theory seems to have places where it's ambiguous about what it's predicting or where it's inconsistent. The theoryalso only makes a very narrow kind of prediction, according to the Dirac-Von Nuemann axioms. So the Dirac-Von Nuemann axioms, and again, these are the axioms you'll read if you pick up Griffith's textbook on quantum mechanics or Shankar's textbook on quantum mechanics or Sakurai's, allthe standard textbooks, Townsend's book on quantum mechanics, Gottfried's book on quantum mechanics,Leboff. The theory predicts measurement outcomes. It predicts what you'll see on the readings,on the dials, on the gauges, on the displays of measuring devices, and it predicts the probabilitywith which you will see those readings on measuring devices. You can compute averagesin these theories, they're called expectation values, but those averages are definitionally,axiomatically, statistically weighted averages of numerical measurement results weightedby measurement outcome probabilities. We're talking about a very narrow kind of phenomenon,right? A very narrow category of phenomena. The Dirac-Von Nuemann formulation of quantummechanics predicts measurements, what happens with measurements. It's a very narrow slice,a very narrow category of phenomena. When we spoke last time, we talked about how there are all other kinds of phenomena that seem to be happening around us. In the deep past,primordial gases mixing in the early universe, today, birds foraging, people falling in love, all that stuff. There's lots of phenomena that seem to be taking place that all lie,strictly speaking, outside the axiomatic ambit of the Dirac-Von Nuemann axioms. What are we todo with this? We either say that Dirac-Von Nuemann quantum mechanics simply is not giving a completedescription of nature, which is kind of sad, and if it's not, where is the outer boundary? Now,there are some philosophers who defend this point of view. Nancy Cartwright is a famous philosopher who has argued that maybe we just have different theories in different domains, the universe ismany dappled, they're just like different theories for different things. But it would certainly be aninteresting intellectual exercise, and it would certainly be nice if we could extend quantum theory to describe more of the world. If we do that, now we have a job to do. We either have to explain why all these other phenomena are, in fact, measurements, despite the lack of measuringdevices or whatever. We have to somehow show that all of these things are, in fact, measurements, and therefore, in fact, lie within the axiomatic ambit of theory. Some people have proposed that.But the onus is on them to show that it really works, and it's not clear that it does. Or we need to somehow extend the theory, change the axioms in order to encompass more of the world,and that's part of what I'm interested in doing. Now, there are people who will say, wait a second,decoherence. What about decoherence, right? I mean, sure, okay, fine. The philosophers, or at least physicists who cared a lot about philosophy, they gave us decoherence, but wehaven't now. Doesn't decoherence solve all these problems? Well, Bohm certainly didn't think it solved these problems. He introduced decoherence, and it was insufficient, and ultimately,he introduced his pilot wave corpuscular theory in order to actually get a result.The reason decoherence doesn't do the job is decoherence takes a wave function or state vector,more generally what's called the density matrix, a density operator, and it shows that under certain circumstances, when it's evolving, interacting with an environment in the right way, orinteracting with a measuring device that's coupled to an environment in the right way, the density matrix will change in a certain way. It'll become approximately what we call a diagonal matrix in acertain representation. We call this a basis, and there'll be some entries on the sort of diagonalof the matrix, and the other entries will be approximately zero. At this point, we're supposed to say the measurement's been done, and there's an outcome. The problem is there is nothing in thedynamics, not in the Schrodinger equation, not in the generalizations of the Schrodinger equation, not the Lindblad equation, or the quantum channels that you use to describe this. There's no knowndynamics within normal quantum theory that singles out one of the outcomes. You still need to applythe Born rule to get a probability out of this, and you still need to apply a projection postulate to single out one outcome. There's nothing in the dynamics that will do that for you. Fromtime to time, people have proposed that maybe there's some sufficiently complicated standardtextbook quantum dynamics that will, in fact, cause the system to single out one outcome, butthis is impossible because of the no communication theorem, the no signaling theorem that I mentioned before. Collapsing down to individual states looks superficially like a non-local process,and you can't get a non-local process happening from what we call a local Hamiltonian, and this is guaranteed by the no signaling theorem. There's definitely something that's just not working here, and pinning all this down, not just hand-waving and saying, oh, decoherence, don't ask me any more questions. Pinning this down is a worthwhile exercise. Subjecting thisproblem to rigorous scrutiny may bear fruit. It has borne fruit already, and I would argueit will continue to bear fruit going forward. 

Question: Now going forward, I'd like to talk about your approach, your indivisible stochastic processes. Prior to that,okay, and just so people know, there are three sources. One is the previous interview that we've had with Jacob, and that's on screen right now. It's over two hours long, and it's quite in depth.Another source is, I have a sub stack post where I cover my interpretation of Jacob's theory. Andthen the third is obviously your papers directly. All three of these will be linked on screen and in the description. Prior to that, I want to talk about Wigner's thought experiment, his friend. How is that not just Schrodinger's cat, but replacing the cat with a friend?

Answers: You're completely right. Imean, if you think of the cat as an observer, and the quantum system being observed is theradioactive atomic nucleus that is momentarily in a superposition of decayed and not decayed,it is Wigner's friend thought experiment. When, I mean, the origins of the Schrodinger's cat thoughtexperiment go back to discussions between Einstein and Schrodinger. Einstein had a somewhat lessplayful example involving gunpowder that could either go off or not go off. And Schrodinger, in this 1935 paper, replaces this with the famous cat. But Schrodinger doesn't describe the cat asan observer. I think the real innovation is just rethinking the experiments. You could,I think, absolutely think of the cat as Wigner's friend. If you think that cats count as observers,which I do, and friends, cats are friends and observers, absolutely, then it really, it's more a question of perspective, right? If you don't think of the cat as a candidate observer,then you're not doing the Wigner's friend thought experiment. If you think of the cat as just as legitimate observer as a person, despite not having a PhD, there's always obligatory jokesthat go with the Schrodinger's cat experiment. You're always supposed to say something like, but don't call the humane society. I mean, I don't know why people always, Scott Aaronsonhas like some joke about why is it people always make jokes about this, but yes, if you think ofthe cat as an observer, then it is just the Wigner's friend thought experiment. I think part of the reason why people like to separate these two is in some versions of the Wigner'sfriend thought experiment, you're supposed to be able to ask a question to Wigner's friend, like slide a little note in and ask questions. And if you ask the wrong kind of question,you'll cause a collapse. And if you ask the right kind of a question, you don't get a collapse. Andyou can't do that with a cat. Cats don't talk. At least all the cats I've ever met don't talk.So there are some situations in which actually we do like it to be a sentient and sapient observerwho can communicate. But broadly speaking, they are very similar thought experiments.

Question: Okay, now, just before we move on, and we're going to get to some of the audience questions that people have asked both in the comments and then also on Twitter threads and so on about the previouspodcast. Okay, you mentioned Putnam earlier, and then it's this eternalism, because you can slice up any moment of now. So if there are multiple moments of now, then is it just that every single moment of now exists? Okay, what are the counter arguments to that?

Answer:  It's tough. The Putnam argument for four-dimensionalism or eternalism is, it's a tough argument to refute. But there havebeen attempts. And I would recommend that people watching this read some of these papers because,you know, they're beautifully written by very smart, amazing people. So again, justto rehearse this argument, if you think of space, for our purposes, just as like a horizontal line,and time as a vertical line, you can visualize all of space-time as like a, like think of graph paperwith like the horizontal axis is space, all three dimensions of space somehow like projected down into one dimension, and then a vertical dimension, right? The idea is that what an observer calls nowmight be a horizontal line in this picture, all the moments at all points in space that are allhappening at the same vertical time coordinate, all the same time coordinates now. And whatspecial relativity suggests is that if you're in a state of motion, then that slice is tilteda little bit. It's like not quite horizontal anymore relative to the first slice. And so things that are further in the future compared with one observer are in the present of the second observerand so forth. One way I like to think about this is the pancake model of space-time. So imagine astack of pancakes. Each pancake is supposed to be all of space, the whole spatial universe atone moment in time, okay? And think of this in the pre-relativistic idea, like the Newtonianconception that there's just a well-defined notion of what is all of space at every moment in time, you get a stack of pancakes. And let's say one of the pancakes is the hot pancake. The hot pancakeis the now pancake. It's the pancake that is what's happening right now. And somehow thehot pancake is somehow incrementing, right? And this is the passage of time. Now you run into some very deep questions like how quickly are the pancakes moving? They're moving at one second persecond. Does one second per second make sense? If you divide a second by a second, isn't that just unitless? What are we talking about? Okay, but let's put all that aside for a second. Justimagine that there is some notion of a moving now, this sort of metaphysically presentist idea that the present exists, it's a well-defined thing, and it is somehow incrementing forward.What special activity seems to suggest is that observers in different states of motion will slicethe stack of pancakes slightly diagonally. And so to an observer who is moving at some, you know,it doesn't even have to be super fast, because if you're talking about the whole universe, even slow motion will actually, you know, ultimately produce a clear discrepancy. But,you know, the slices are now tilted. And if you're cutting the stack of pancakes at a slight tilt,how can there be a hot pancake anymore? The two observers don't even agree on whether the slicesare horizontal slices or slightly diagonal slices. How could there be a metaphysically invariant notion that one of them in one particular slicing is in fact the hot pancake?So you can see why this is like a very difficult argument to refute. But there have been attempts.So Brad Scout MIT has a book with a particular perspective on this. I encourage people to takea look at this approach. Another approach is Jean Annis Mayle, who is at Johns Hopkins University,philosopher of physics, philosopher of science. She has a book called How Physics Makes Us Free.And she has a very interesting argument about how you might get around this problem. I'm not going to be able to do justice to the argument here, but I would recommend people read the bookbecause she's a fantastic writer, and I think people will find it very interesting to read this book. There's a paper from not long ago by David Wheelies at Princeton. He's a metaphysician whodoes some work in philosophy of science also at Princeton. And he has an argument that, you know,putting aside the special advisory argument, he's like, you know, maybe we can't, maybe it's a difficult argument to deal with, but at least rather than try to refute that negative argument,an argument against presentism, maybe there are good arguments for presentism. We should focus on those. And his argument in that paper is that many of our fundamental laws of physics appear tobe Markovian. And Markovian laws are by definition laws that take a notion of a present state andtell you the later states without really worrying about anything in the past. And he's like,you know, why should the laws be Markovian if we're living in an eternalist universe? If we live in an eternalist four-dimensional universe where the whole block is just like there, why would ourlaws only care about the present state? There'd be no explanation for this. But if only the presentreally exists and the past doesn't exist, that would give an explanation for why our laws only care about the present. Unfortunately, as I'm sure you and people who are watching will, you know,surmise, I have some issues with this argument because the whole point of the formulation of quantum mechanics we're going to talk about is that actually the laws may not fundamentally beMarkovian at all. And if they're not Markovian, then all of a sudden that argument doesn't maybe work so well.

**Question:** Yeah. It's my understanding, and we're going to get to it, that your evolution laws depend on the past. It's not as if they depend on the future. So in the eternalist state,when they're saying that, why would we privilege the present? And then you're saying, well,in yours, you're not, but you're also not privileging the future. You actually are privileging the past. So you still don't take an eternalist block.

**Answer:** So this is, this is a subtlety, right? The fundamental laws of physics that we know about today, to a very good approximation,have a feature called time-reversal invariance or time symmetry. Newtonian mechanics, famously,if you run a system in one particular, you know, in some particular process, and then someone plays a reverse version of the, you watch a video of it and someone's rewindingand they're winding at normal speed and you watch the whole thing happen in reverse. Although it may look weird or unlikely, there doesn't appear to be any violation of Newtonian physics inwhat you're seeing. You know, so famous example, a teacup falls off the table, shatters. There is a,you could also have all the pieces have just the right initial conditions so that they have someinitial velocity that's just right to bounce them together. And they just land perfectly together. And they re-seal together and form the teacup. And the teacup has just the right kinetic energythat it bounces off and lands on the table. Like it's unlikely, but doesn't actually violate any of the laws of Newtonian physics. And this works out pretty well until you get to the standardmodel. There are some systems involving kaons in the standard model that exhibita slight violation of time reversal invariance. Technically it's CP invariance, but the symmetryin which you replace particles and antiparticles is called C-symmetry. The symmetry in which you do a parity or spatial reflection and everything is called parity symmetry. And then there's timereversal. And the standard model, our best theory of fundamental particle physics that's based onquantum field theory has this feature that it is exactly CPT invariance. If you take any processin the standard model and do a combined particle goes to antiparticle vice versa and parity and time reversal transformation, everything stays the same. And there are some systems that violate CPsymmetry. And then by the CPT invariance, that means they violate T or time reversal symmetry. But there are rare processes. It's not clear that they have anything to do with the macroscopicdistinction of future and past that we tend to see. There are some, you know, conjectures aboutthis, but no one has a firm argument that these two things are closely related. So the idea ofa physical theory like we're talking about that somehow privileges the past, but not the future in an eternalist universe seems a little bit odd. I should say right off the bat that the indivisiblestochastic formulation does not fundamentally privilege the past or the future. You could just as well formulate a quantum system that's going the other way. There's nothing, it's not,the theory doesn't specifically, it's just that like when you actually consider a particular like system, it'll be a system in which the past plays a different role from the future, but you couldalso consider a system which the future plays a different role from the past. It's, we call it not a fundamental breaking of time reversal invariance, but a spontaneous breaking of timereversal invariance. Not a breaking in the sense that fundamentally, like nature's about pickingout future versus past, but just that in a given instantiation, in a given situation,nature has to pick one particular direction in each instantiation and depicts one over the other. Like the laws of Newtonian mechanics fundamentally are rotation invariant, but you are not rotationinvariant. Your atoms formed in a particular shape and whatever shape they formed picked outa direction in space. So you spontaneously break rotation invariance, even though fundamentally like the laws of Newtonian physics are rotation invariant. The laws of quantum physics,according to this indivisible stochastic approach are fundamentally time reversal invariant, but for a given model, they will typically favor one direction of time over the other. I should havesaid there is one other way to save, at least I can think of, one other way to save the idea of aflow of time, a directness to time. And this is to say, well, okay, special relativity is a very goodtheory, but we're living in an expanding universe. We're living in a space time that appears to goback to some kind of big bang hypersurface, some initial big bang everywhere. And distances betweenobjects are growing with time in some particular way. It turns out that in these kinds of, we callthem cosmologies. So cosmology is the subject of the study of the universe, but a particular likespace time model that solves Einstein's field equations at the level of the whole universe is called a cosmology. And in the cosmology, we seem to be living in approximately what's calledEinstein-De Sitter cosmology described by the FLRW model. In this model, there is in fact apreferred slicing of space, right? You just take every point in the universe and ask like how longago was the big bang from that point and take all the points that are all 13.78 billion years sincethe big bang, and they form a hypersurface. And if you just do that, you actually get kind of like a preferred slicing of the universe. And you might go, that seems to contradict special relativity.Well, but general relativity is not special relativity. General relativity is a different theory. And in general relativity, different space times can globally, like at the scale of the wholespace time, spontaneously break the symmetry of the slicings, the so-called Lorentz symmetry.Because there's a preferred big bang hypersurface, there's a preferred foliation or slicing of spacetime into slices of now. And so just the history of the universe, the way that it happened to beinstantiated for the bang appears to have picked out a preferred way to slice the universe.And then you could say, okay, well then that really is the fundamental notion of time. Time is really flowing from one such surface to the next. And sure, if you zoom in really close tolike a planet or a star or some very localized thing, things look like special relativity. Youdon't notice the whole shape of the cosmology and all the different reference frames look the same and all the slicings look like they're in the same footing. But on a global cosmological scale,there in fact is a preferred way to slice things. And time really flows from one slice to the otherin some fundamental sense in that picture. But this leads to some other really deep questions.Is the geometry of our cosmology a fundamental fact? Or is it merely a contingency? Could theuniverse have formed in lots of other ways? And it just happened that it formed in this particular way with this preferred slicing. And if it was contingent, if the universe could have formedin lots of ways or could have been eternal, but happened to form in this particular way, can youmetaphysically say that time flows in some fundamental sense based on what was a contingent fact about the universe? Like if you think the flow of time is some fundamentalfeature of reality, should depend on accidents of history? No pun intended, but you get my point,right? So just to close the circle, that's like one other way people have thought about maybe restoring a notion of a flow of time. Okay, sorry, that was a lot, but yeah.

Question: Okay, briefly, before we close that circle, you mentioned that in GR you can spontaneously break Lorentz symmetry. What's the difference between breaking a symmetry and spontaneously breaking a symmetry?

Answer: Okay, so if you take a theory and the basic equations that formulate laws of that theorysimply fail to have a certain symmetry. And by a symmetry here, I mean a transformation thatwould have a certain symmetry. So if you take a theory and the basic equations that formulate laws of that theory simply fail to have a certain symmetry. Maybe for certain kinds of theories, certain kind of laws leave the laws unchanged. For this particular theory,they do not leave the laws unchanged. So let me give an example. Let's suppose that the universeis described by the Newtonian physics near Earth's surface, and that is the whole universe. There is,in fact, no Earth. The universe is infinitely big, and it is like Earth's surface forever,right? Earth's surface just goes on in every direction forever. There is the ground, andit never ends. You can go as far as you want, and it doesn't wrap around. It just goes on forever, right? There's no planets or anything like that. The whole universe is just life nearan infinitely big surface. Okay. That's all that there ever is. And that's fundamentally all that there is. It's not an accident of history. That's just how the universe is. It was fundamentally,its existence is just this infinite ground that goes forever. When gravity points down, and that'sa law of nature, a completely fundamental law of nature that gravity points down, this is a theory that fundamentally breaks three-dimensional rotation invariance. The basic laws of this theoryinclude that there's a force called gravity that points in a particular direction, and if you takeany system in this universe and rotate it in a way that is not parallel to the ground, the laws lookdifferent now, right? Things fall sideways now. The theory, the laws are not invariant under this transformation. We would call that an explicit breaking of rotation symmetry.

Question: I see. Okay. So I guess terminologically I'm confused because breaking to me seems like it was there before, and then now it's broken. So breaking in this instance just means it fails to have it to begin with.

Answer:  That's right. It fails to have it to begin with. That's the better way to say it. I guess the terminology is because these are often symmetries that were there in earlier theories,and then maybe in a deeper theory, the symmetry is gone. So we say that like the kaons violate time reversal symmetry, right? We call it a violation or a breaking because beforewe discovered these particles, we thought it was a symmetry, and it's broken by kaons, right? SoI think maybe that's one way to think about it, or maybe it's that we have a lot of theories in which certain symmetries are approximately true, but they're not exactly true. And then we can thinkof certain particular things in the theory that violate it, whereas broadly speaking, it's not violated. That's entirely fair. But the example of Svante Hinsbryg would be like the actual Earth,right? The actual Earth is not an infinite surface, it's a sphere in space. And when you're on the Earth, you do feel like gravity is pointing in a particular direction, but this is just anaccident of Earth being there. If you could delete the Earth, and we're just floating in space, thensuddenly you would have full access to the road. There'd be no notion of up or down, or left, likethe left or right is actually subtle because it's parity invariance, which is a different thing. But I mean, there's no preferred direction in space if Earth isn't there. Earth's presence, by anaccident of just that's the way this particular corner of the universe was instantiated, not at the level of fundamentally changing laws of physics. But Earth being there and us livingon the Earth makes us think that a symmetry that is fundamentally there, rotation variance, full three-dimensional rotation variance, is in fact not there. It's hidden from us. Somepeople say spontaneous symmetry hiding is a better term than spontaneous symmetry breaking. But yeah,so this just points to this distinction between, am I really saying a certain symmetry is not there in the fundamental statement of the theory, or is it just hidden or missing because of theway that a particular system has instantiated the theory?

Question: Okay, so I didn't know that, for instance, when you were talking about molecules to form you, and the molecules have some rotational invariance. But you don't, thankfully, have that rotational invariance. I have rotational invariance. As faras we can tell. But that forming of you was not spontaneous, so the person who's watching or listening is thinking, well, it took quite some time to form Jacob. Because I thought spontaneous symmetry breaking had to dowith, you have a potential well, and then you get to the minimum of it, and you produce some ghost-home bosons. And I thought it was just for that case. I didn't realize it was any time thata symmetry was broken. You call it spontaneously broken.

Answer:  When it's broken by the way a particular system happens to form or a particular solution to the theory. So here's another way to thinkabout spontaneous symmetry breaking. There is a puzzle called shape by shape. It's this little,it's a square. It's a delightful little puzzle. You've got these yellow shapes and these orangeshapes. And you have a picture you're supposed to create. And you take all the shapes and you put them into the square. And you try to fit them all in the square. And they have to fit exactly in thesquare with no gaps. And they have to replicate the picture you see. It's like a yellow background with an orange shape in the middle, and you have to replicate that. And the setup of this game ismirror symmetric. It's a square, the playing field is a square which is perfectly mirror symmetric.And although some of the pieces are what we call chiral. Chiral means that they're handed. There'slike, the pieces look like a left-handed piece or right-handed piece. It turns out they're notreally chiral cuz you can just flip them over. You can flip them over and then you discover the fact that, yeah. But in any particular way that they're flipped, they pick out what seems like onedirection. So, and there's like an equal number of pieces. Everything about the setup of this game ismirror symmetric. You can lay out the board, lay out all the pieces, lay them out in a way that you look at a picture and you just flip the thing over and it looks exactly the same. And youcan even have a picture you're trying to make. And this picture you're trying to make is also mirror symmetric, right? You look at the picture, it's some totally symmetric looking figure. And soyou're like, okay, I should be able to take my symmetric puzzle pieces and create a symmetricpicture. And I should be able to do it by putting the pieces into a configuration that is mirror symmetric. And it turns out, in some cases, you can't. In some cases, all the solutions to thisproblem, despite the fact that the problem, the laws of this system are mirror symmetric,none of its solutions are mirror symmetric. Once you've solved it, you discover that the solutions are always lopsided. There's like different pieces on one side versus the other, and there's nosolution that is balanced and symmetric. We would say this is a system that entails spontaneoussymmetry breaking. The equations, the fundamental laws are symmetric, but all the possible waysto solve it are not. Now, you could also have systems, maybe there's a puzzle in which it canbe solved in a symmetric way, and it can also be solved in a non-symmetric way. We would still call the solutions that are not symmetric, but still solve the puzzle, we'd still call them spontaneousbreaking solutions. So this is a phenomenon that happens all over the place. There's anotherexample that one of my colleagues here, Cameron Vafa, a professor of high energy theoreticalphysics, works in string theory. He has a lovely book called Puzzles to Solve the Universe,I think. It's connected to a seminar course he teaches here. And he has this puzzle he reallylikes. It's this puzzle where you've got four cities that are on the corners of a square.And the question is, how can you connect them with roads? So you can get from any one city to anyother city, driving on roads, using the minimum amount of road length or pavement possible. Thisproblem is completely rotation symmetric. It's a square, right? It was stated in a way that didn't privilege any direction. And you can always rotate the square any way you want, it looks the same. Soyou might think that the solution is gonna be, I don't know, an X. But an X doesn't, an X worksbecause you can make an X and then you can go to the middle of the X and you can get to any city. It turns out that Xs use too much pavement. The solutions that minimize the amount of pavementused are these kind of like double Y solutions. And there's one that goes horizontally and onethat goes vertically. And these minimize the amount of pavement and they both violate thesymmetry of the problem. So this is spontaneous symmetry breaking and we see it all over the place. If you've ever wondered, how can the universe look so asymmetric, given that thefundamental laws of physics appear to have so many symmetries? The fundamental laws of physics don't seem to privilege direction. To a very good approximation, they don't seem to privilegehandedness, left versus right handedness. They don't seem to privilege the direction of time.And yet, the universe looks so asymmetric. This is basically all just a huge set of examplesof spontaneous symmetry breaking. You can have a fundamental system where the laws or the equations are fundamentally invariant under a bunch of symmetries. But when you actually write down thesolutions to them, every molecular configuration is a solution to the standard model. Many ofthem simply fail to have all the symmetries of the underlying theory.

Question: Okay, so we've made the audience titillated too long now. So tell the audience and myself again, a recapitulation of last podcast about what indivisible stochastic processes are. And if you feel like relating itto Bohmian mechanics, because people already know what Bohmian mechanics are, you've covered it, then feel free to do so as a bridge.

Answer:  Sounds great, yeah. So the top line version of this is, there's this joke about the television show Seinfeld being a show about nothing. This is a theory about something. It's a theory about phenomena happening. So again, we had this problemin the Drach von Neumann formulation of quantum mechanics, the textbook formulation. And the only category of phenomena we're talking about is this narrow category of measurement outcomes. Whereaswe have this much bigger category of phenomena that's gonna be happening all over the place. I call this the category problem. It's distinct from the famous measurement problem of quantum mechanics. So it'd be nice to have a theory in which stuff is just happening. Now, this is not the only approach that does this. And later on, I'll talk about pilot wave theory, Bohmian mechanics, the Everettian or many-worlds approach, spontaneous collapse approaches. There are otherreformulations of quantum mechanics in which phenomena are happening. And they all, in variousways, address this category problem that is not adequately addressed by the standard theory. Soone way to think about this is, this is yet one more way to actually have phenomena happening. In a broad sense, beyond merely the narrow category of measurement outcomes. Another way to thinkabout this is, it's a way to make the world safe for good old-fashioned probability theory. Sowhen we do quantum mechanics according to the Hilbert space, Drach von Neumann formulation,we have these very exotic mathematical entities. These vectors are density operators, and Hilbertspaces, and Born rule, and it's all very, it feels very different from ordinary probability theory.Probabilities do show up, but there are many things that you just can't do using probabilitytheory. You have to use this much more ornate, esoteric apparatus, this formal apparatus in thissort of Hilbert space language. In this approach, we restore our ability to do quantum mechanicsusing good old-fashioned probability theory. That's one other way to think about what we're trying to accomplish with all of this. So, but let me actually go one step deeper before I lay outhow it works. Another way to think about this is, there are two long-running prevailing assumptionsabout what physical theories are supposed to be like. One assumption is that laws of a theoryshould be Markovian. Laws of a theory should take some notion of a present physical state, and thentell you what happens next. If your theory is time reversible, the laws are time reversible, then itshould also be able to tell you what would happen previously, at least in principle. Another of thetwo assumptions is that there's an all or nothing deal when it comes to observables. The things wecan observe about a theory are either all there, they're all, when we measure some observable, weare passively revealing some existing feature or property of our system. In which case, we shouldbe able to describe these things with any kind of probability distribution we want, including joint probabilities, where we can say what's the probability that this observable has thispre-existing value, and that observable has that pre-existing value, and that observable, and we can put a probability distribution on all of these things in some simple way. And if we can't,then we just give up. If we can't, then it's all out the window, can't do it. There aregood reasons to think that we can't do this in quantum mechanics. There's a famous no-go theorem,originally proved by Bell, but because of the way that it was published, the first version that cameinto print, I think, was by Kochen and Specker in the 1960s. It's called the Kochen-Specker no-gotheorem. And the Kochen-Specker theorem basically says that there are some quantum systems in which this is impossible. There's some systems in which you cannot assume all observable things have priorvalues that you are merely passively revealing. And there's a beautiful way to explain it,a very simple version, much simpler than the original version. It's due to Asher Perez in the 1990s. Imagine you're playing a weird version of tic-tac-TOE. This is a very strange version oftic-tac-TOE. Here's how it's gonna work. You know tic-tac-TOE, this we call it in America. I know it's called like crosses and O's or whatever in different places. But tic-tac-TOE, you've got agrid, it's got nine empty squares. We're not gonna play it the normal way, we're gonna play it thefollowing way. I am going to close my eyes and I'm going to imagine an arrangement of O's and X's onthis board. I'm gonna close my eyes and I'm gonna tell you, I promise you, I can visualize, I seeit, I see a bunch of O's and X's. It's in my head. Believe me, I really know what it is. And whatyou're gonna do is you're gonna call out a single row or a single column. That's it. And if yourrow or column that you call out has an odd number of X's, you win. If it has an even number of X's,you lose. And you only get one try. If you guess and you fail, then we're done, you lose thatround. We can play again, but then I have to come up with a new board. It's a super simple game. So the way that the game would work, and when I teach my philosophy of quantum mechanics class, we dothis, we do this example. I say, I've got the board, okay, and I'm gonna go to, first person, you pick a row or column. The person says, second row, and I write X O X. Sorry, even number of X's,you lose. We erase it. I say, I'm coming up with a new board. The second person says, I'm gonna pick the second row again. And this time, the second row is O O O. Sorry, even number of X's, zero inthis case, you lose. And I erase it, I come up with a new board, the next person goes. And they keep trying different rows and columns. And what they discover is that every time they pick a row,they always get an even number of X's. First row, it's always an even number of X's. Second row,third row, always an even number of X's. When they pick columns, the first column, always an even number of X's. The second column, always an even number of X's. But the third alwayshas an odd number of X's every time. And so what they learn is they'll just keep picking the last column and they always win. Just keep picking the last column and they always win. But then they go,well, wait a second, this doesn't make sense. If you've really thought of this board in your head,then you're saying that you've thought of a board in your head where every row has an even number of X's. The first two columns also have an even number of X's, but the third column has an odd number of X's. This is impossible. It can't be because even plus even plus even is evenif all the rows secretly in my head have an even number of X's. Like it can't be just an image in your head that's static. Right. There can't be a static image in my head in which all the rowshave an even number of X's. And the first two columns have an even number, the third has an odd number because row plus row plus row would be even. Column plus column would be odd. That'sclearly incompatible. You must be creating the results only when we ask about them. You can'talready have a preexisting board in your mind. And I go, you win. You're right. But there are quantumsystems with this feature, with nine observables, nine observables, with the feature that the rowsall have an even number and the first two columns have an even number, but the last one has an odd number. And you look at the system and you go, there's no way this system could alreadyknow beforehand what it was going to reveal. The measurement process must bring about, at least in some cases, the results. So the hard way to read this is to say, well, if some results arethe result of the measurement process and don't merely passively reveal a preexisting situation,then there's simply no preexisting results. It's all or nothing. They're either all there or they're not there. That is also something I would push back on. So again, Markovianity in the laws, this assumption that laws should be things like differential equations that take the present state and give you later states. And second, there's this all or nothing relationship. Either allthe things you could observe are there, waiting to be seen, can be assigned joint probability distributions as needed, or they're just like not there. There's just nothing there. And these aretwo things that are challenged in this approach. Both of these things are dropped, the Markovianity and this assumption. In this picture, the fundamental laws of nature are not Markovian andsome observable quantities are reflecting things that are really there and others are emergent effects of the interaction between the measuring device and the system being measured. This is oneway in which the theory is actually quite similar to Bohmian mechanics. People have known for a very long time that in Bohmian mechanics, some things you observe, like where your particles are,are revealing preexisting facts of the matter. Bell gave a word for things that were reallyout there. He called them not observables, but beables. It's the way that the system can be, like beable instead of observable. Some people read it and think it's beable,but it's actually beable. Whereas other things you could observe are not really reflecting athing that was there and they're just emergent features of the story. I call these emergibles instead of beables. To an external measuring device, they look just as real as a beable, butreally what you're seeing in the measuring device is this sort of emergent pattern. It's not really reflecting something that's fundamentally there. Bohmian mechanics does this. In Bohmian mechanics,the positions of particles are beables. You measure them and you're really seeing where the particles were. But when you measure the momentum of your particle, the momentum you actually see inyour experiment is not literally the preexisting momentum. It's this sort of emergent effect ofthe interaction with the system. There's a paper, you can look up on the archive. It's called NaiveRealism About Operators. It's from 1996. It was written by Daumer, Durer, Goldstein, and Zanghi.It's specifically about this thing, that to think that every self-adjoint operator that in textbookquantum mechanics, direct quantum mechanics would associate with observable is revealing something that preexists in the system is actually, as they put it, too naive. You can really have some thingsthat are there and some things that are not there and it's totally fine. It's not a serious problem.I'll come back to this point a little bit later because some of the questions that we've gotten from people have been about basis dependence and in this picture, can you really measureeverything? The answer is you can. It's just that some of them are going to be beables and some of them are going to be emergibles. Okay, so we drop those two things. There's an old saying. I can't quite pin down who said it. Some people attribute it to John Wheeler, again, that if you couldexplain quantum mechanics, you should be able to say it in one sentence. I don't know if Wheeler was the one who originally said this. People can source this. But here it is in one sentence. Inthe indivisible formulation of quantum mechanics, every system has an actual configuration belongingto some menu of possible configurations we call the configuration space. I do have to put an andin. And there's a comma and an and. It's still one sentence. And the dynamics, the dynamical rules,the laws by which the configuration changes with time is characterized by a sparse set of directedconditional probabilities that generically fail to be divisible in time. That's the whole picture.And in principle, you can get everything out of that one sentence. Everything is now just mathematics. So there's no more ands. There's no more ands. That's it. That's the picture. Let'snow let's talk about like what. So if you want to talk in terms of Occam's razor like this is,you know, we'll come back to Occam's razor in a little bit, please. But but just to say like this is this is like axiomatically pretty simple. There's no statement about Hilbertspace or whatever. Everything is phrased in terms of things we know and are familiar with, configurations that physically are. Which configurations depend on the system. If you wantto model a system of particles, you use particle configurations. If you want to use fields, you use field configurations. If you want to use whatever discrete registers in a qubit, you know,memory register, you'd use those, whatever it is you want to use, discrete, continuous, whatever you want. And then the the laws themselves are phrased as probabilistic statements, but they'reclassical probabilities. They're classical ordinary probabilities. Classical is maybe too strong a word because maybe you might demand that classical time evolving probabilities must beMarkovian. I don't, I think it's it's a little bit prejudicial to say that they have to be that way, but certainly they're just normal probabilities. They're not weird Hilbert space things. Thereare complex numbers in them. They're just regular probabilities. They sum to one. They do the things that probabilities are supposed to do. So that's the picture. And then in the first of the papers,the paper called the stochastic quantum correspondence, which is on the archive, it's now just a set of mathematical mappings. You take this picture and you just do thesesort of mathematical transformations and you end up with the same story, but formulated in this Hilbert space language with time evolution operators and state vectors anddensity operators and self-adjoint. This picture is just like a different mathematical phrasingof this indivisible picture. And there's a lovely analogy to be found here between these indivisiblesystems, these indivisible stochastic systems that have this Hilbert space formulation that's very exotic and has complex numbers in it. And it's got all these weird symmetries. It's got basisinvariance. You have all these different bases you can use. There's a beautiful correspondence between that connection, that stochastic quantum correspondence and the so-calledHamiltonian formulation of classical physics. So Newtonian systems, classical Newtonian systems, interestingly, are not quite Markovian, right? Think about it, right? You can't predict how aparticle will behave knowing only its position. You actually have to know its position and youhave to know its infinitesimally earlier position. You actually need two pieces of information. Now,we don't usually formulate it that way because it's a little cumbersome to talk about where it is now and where it is infinitesimally before, like DT, you know, D like infinite calculus,infinitesimal D before. That's kind of cumbersome to do. So instead what we do is we subtract the two and divide by DT and call that a velocity. But it's the same information. If youwant to like numerically simulate a Newtonian system and you like discretize time to do it,you would specify where it is now, where it was a moment ago, and you'd plug this into a discretizedversion of Newton's second law of force equals mass times acceleration and you would predict the behavior of the system. So even Newtonian physics is a little bit non-Markovian. But we do tricks.We don't like having it be non-Markovian. So what we do is we replace the two positions at the two infinitesimally adjacent times with a position and a so-called instantaneous velocity,which is kind of this trick so that we can treat these two things as both being at the same time. And now we've made the formalism look Markovian. Now we have a state at the initial timethat consists of both the coordinate, so-called coordinate, the position and the velocity. But weneed twice the variables now. We've increased the number of variables in order to phrase this thing as a Markovian system. And this is an old thing you could do with in stochastic processes. Intheory of stochastic processes, if you consider a system that is a little bit non-Markovian, so not extremely non-Markovian like these indivisible processes we're talking about,but a system in which you need to know the present state and maybe just one earlier state or maybetwo earlier states to then figure out how the system will evolve. You could take these systems and you can treat them like they're Markovian by just increasing what you mean by the statespace. I see. Like you triple the state space so that now you can just treat these three things asif they're all on one slice and now you turn it to a Markovian system. And so there's this lore that you can take any non-Markovian system and make it Markovian just at the cost of making thestate space big enough. Just like in Newtonian mechanics, we take what was just coordinates and we double it to be coordinates and velocities. And now we have what looks like a Markoviandescription. This doesn't work for an indivisible system. When systems are sufficiently extremely non-Markovian, you can't do this. And I think this was a little bit of tunnel vision. People thought,well, you can always do this. So what's so interesting about very non-Markovian systems? But if the system is non-Markovian enough, this trick doesn't work and you actually have somethingthat's really non-trivially different. But then what you can do is reformulate the Hamiltoniansystem in what's called the Hamiltonian formulation. In the Hamiltonian formulation, we rephrase what we were talking about, the state space, the states, the positions andvelocities in terms of what are called canonical coordinates, which kind of generalize the notionof the position, and the canonical momenta, which generalize the idea of a velocity. Andthen we call the state space a phase space. The terminology apparently goes back to Boltzmann,because he was thinking in terms of the phase of a pendulum or something like that, some oscillatory system. Where is it in its motion, in its cycle? What phase is it in? This idea is much moregeneral than that. We call this a phase space. And in a phase space, we've got these variables,the Q variables, which are like the generalization of position, and the P variables, which are like the generalizations of velocity, the so-called canonical momenta. And in terms of the Qs and Ps,we can reformulate Newton's laws as first order differential equations, which basically justmeans Markovian. You specify the Q and the P, and then you uniquely get what the next Q and P areat all subsequent moments in time. So this makes the system look like it's beautifully Markovian,position and momentum are now on a perfectly equal footing. The differential geometry speak for this is we're now working on what's called the cotangent bundle of the configuration manifold,but it's not necessary to conceptually understand what's going on here. But what's interesting aboutthis Hamiltonian formulation is it looks weird. It has all these enhanced symmetries. For example,now that we've put the coordinates, the Qs, which again generalize the notion of position, and the Ps, which generalize momentum, we've put them on this sort of very similar footing, andthey enter into the theory in this very equitable way. We can now do changes of variables wherewe can take Q and replace it with P, and P and replace it with negative Q. And in so doing, youcould take a harmonic oscillator with a mass and a spring constant and get a new harmonic oscillatorwhere the mass of the new harmonic oscillator is the reciprocal of the spring constant of the old, and the new spring constant is the reciprocal of the mass of the old, but you could also do much more bizarre transformations. These changes of variables, which are carefully designedto keep the equations, the laws looking very similar, are called canonical transformations.And there is a beautiful connection between these changes of variables of your phase spaceand basis transformations in Hilbert spaces. There's actually a beautiful mathematicalrelationship between them. It helped inspire Dirac to introduce his formulation of quantum mechanics,this sort of analogy between these two things. And the analogy can be made even stronger through a series of papers. There was a paper by Franco Strocci in the 1960s called Complex Coordinatesfor Quantum Mechanics, I think, and then a paper in 1985 by Andrei Heslot. And that paper,I can't remember the name of the paper, but it's from 1985, where they make this analogymuch tighter. They show that any quantum system in Hilbert space language can be rewritten in a way that looks just like a classical Hamiltonian system for a system of coupled harmonicoscillators. It's this beautiful framework, I call it the Strocci-Heslot formulation, and I think there's like a YouTube video of a talk I gave on it. If people want to see the details,we can link to that. People can see how it works. So the connection between this freedom to do all these weird changes of variables that mix up what you mean by the Qs and what you mean by the Ps,you could make a new Q be Q plus P and a new P, mix them up in all these bizarre ways thatmake the fundamental picture very murky. Once we've done this, it's sort of hard to remember what our original system even was. There's a close connection between that enhanced set of symmetriesand the basis rotations in quantum mechanics. You also see the emergence of complex structure,complex numbers in the Hamiltonian formulation. There's a beautiful way you could take the Qs and the Ps and write the Qs as Q plus square root of minus one, the imaginary unit times P, up to someengineering dimensions. You have to get the units right. But basically you can define a complex variable and rewrite the whole picture in complex coordinates, and it simplifies the mathematics ina very beautiful way. And this brings the analogy out with quantum mechanics even tighter. For thoseviewers who know about Poisson brackets, if you rephrase Poisson brackets in terms of these sortof complex representations, it makes canonical quantization look even more like clean. Sowe have this incredible similarity. You start with a non-Markovian system, in this case justsecond-order non-Markovian Newtonian mechanics, depends on coordinates and the previous time coordinate. And we can reformulate it as a Markovian-looking, beautiful, this Hamiltonianphase-based formalism with all these enhanced symmetries and even complex structures, and we can do really powerful things. And these complex formulations can be used to solve all kinds ofdifficult problems in ways that are difficult to do in Newtonian mechanics. They even leadto a wave-like picture called the Hamilton-Jacobi formulation, which led to Schrodinger discoveringwave mechanics. And there's this complete analogy where you could take an indivisible stochasticsystem, which is also a non-Markovian system, much more non-Markovian and probabilistic, the system I just described to you, that I laid out, and do this change of mathematical representation,and you get a Hilbert space picture, which also is very exotic-looking, and also has a very murkysort of physical world picture, and also has all these enhanced symmetries, these basis rotations, and also sees the emergence of complex numbers. The analogy is actually very close betweenthese two pictures. And again, that change of representation to the Hilbert space picture is called the stochastic quantum correspondence. But now we can do all kinds of things that wecouldn't do before, okay? So one example, why is the dynamical equation of quantum mechanics Markovian? It's Markovian because you can just see as you do this change of representation, you cansee how we took a non-Markovian thing and wrote it as a Markovian kind of evolution at the costof introducing all of these weird new ingredients. The phases, the off-diagonal entries, the densitymatrices, interference effects, superposition, all of these ingredients are the cost that youincur by trying to represent what is fundamentally not a Markovian system, an extremely non-Markoviansystem, as a Markovian system. They're the prices you pay. We talked before about, like,are these memory effects? Memory is not quite the right metaphor for indivisible stochasticprocesses. Traditional non-Markovian processes require that you specify sort of conditionalprobabilities conditioned in arbitrarily many previous times. That's very complicated and has a lot of structure and contains a lot of information. And you can legitimately ask, whereis that information being stored? An indivisible process is actually much simpler. It doesn't entail the specification of all those higher order non-Markovian probabilities. It's muchsparser. All you're supplied with are first order conditional probabilities that don't concatenate,that can't be divided, that aren't Markovian. So there's actually less information and less memory,much less memory, than is in a traditionally stated non-Markovian process. So there's no question about where is the memory being stored. It's not that there's memory per se. It's thatthe system's evolution doesn't depend only on the present state. So memory is not quite the rightword for it, but there's a kind of memory-ish kind of thing. And that's what's being encodedin all of those coherences and superpositions interference, which otherwise don't have any,in the traditional textbook formulation, they're just math that produce empirical implications whenwe do experiments. But we don't have a meaning that we can attach to them. Here, we can attach a meaning. Where are the artifacts of taking what is ultimately not a Markovian process andforcing it to be in a Markovian formalism? But we can go beyond that, right? So we can explainwhy the equations look Markovian. We can explain what the interference terms are and the phases and the coherences and the superpositions. We can explain what those things are. We can also explainwhy the evolution law is linear. For a closed quantum system, a system that is not engaging ininformation exchange with its larger environment, the evolution is given by a linear equation,the Schrodinger equation if the system is sufficiently smoothly evolving in time, or more generally, unitary evolution. These are linear. And the question is,where does that linearity come from? It's just an axiom according to the textbook Dirac von Neumann axioms. But in the indivisible approach, it just comes right out of the change of representation.It comes out of the fact that ordinary probability has a linear law. If you're given initialprobabilities, and you want to compute final probabilities, and you're using the conditional probabilities that are given to you in laws, the relationship between the early probabilities andthe later probabilities is a linear law. It's given by what's called Bayesian marginalization,I mean, there's various terms for it, law of total probability. But it's a linear relationship, and that linear relationship becomes the linearity of time evolution of quantum mechanics, which,so now that has an explanation too. And you might go, well, what about unitarity? I mean, I didn't start my indivisible process, how did it know to become unitary? It turns out that there's a classof indivisible processes called, they're based on what's called a unistochastic transition matrix.The term unistochastic goes back to a lecture in like the late 1980s, but the idea actuallygoes back, it's a much older term. So Robert Thompson introduced the term unistochastic, but the original term was orthostochastic, and it was introduced by Alfred Horn, a mathematician inthe 1950s. And he wasn't studying stochastic processes, he was just studying the analyticproperties, the pure math analytic properties of stochastic matrices. And he noted there was a particular kind of stochastic matrix, the kinds of matrices that show up in stochastic theories.These matrices are matrices with non-negative entries, they're square, they have non-negative entries, and their columns all sum to one. But there's a particular subclass of them that hecalled orthostochastic, today we would call them unistochastic, that have very beautiful, interesting analytic properties. From the standpoint of a pure mathematician,they have very neat properties. The idea of building a physical stochastic process usingthese as the matrices that contain all of your conditional probabilities, that is new. I mean,that wasn't an idea that people had proposed. So you could just say, the particular kind of indivisible processes I'm interested in are unistochastic processes, and these are exactlythe processes that when you run them through the stochastic quantum correspondence, on the other side you end up with unitary evolution. Now you might go, that's a little dissatisfyingbecause that doesn't explain why evolution is unitary. You had to assume a particularly special kind of stochastic process, of an indivisible process that it was unistochastic. The technicaldefinition is unistochastic process is a process where all the conditional probabilities arerelated in a very simple way to the entries of unitary matrix. That makes it seem a little bit too canned. But there's a theorem that's proved in the first of the papers, the stochastic quantumcorrespondence paper, that even if you don't start with a unistochastic process, even if you start with just a completely boring, ordinary, generic, indivisible stochastic process, you do the changeof representation to the Hilbert space picture, you can always write that process as what's calleda quantum channel. A quantum channel is also known as a linear, completely positive, trace-preservingmap. These are well-studied in the quantum information literature. It's not obvious that you can do this. But you can. It's a simple, yeah.

Question: The mapping from the indivisible stochastic processesto the Hilbert space picture can be represented by a quantum channel, or is a quantum channel? 

Answer:  So you start with your indivisible stochastic process, which is a probabilistic, it just says given where the system is now, this is the probability it'll be there later. You run it through the stochasticquantum correspondence, you now have density matrices and state vectors, all this stuff show up. And the time evolution is now carried out by what's called a time evolution operator thattakes your current state and gives you your later state. In general, this time evolution operator is not unitary, unless your original process was unistochastic. In general, if it's not originallyunistochastic, then the time evolution operator will not be unistochastic. But it turns out youcan still write it as a quantum channel. This time evolution operator that shows up on the other side looks kind of weird, but it turns out it can be written as this very well-studied thing calleda quantum channel. And quantum channels can be turned into unitary evolution by another change of representation. Borrowing a theorem by Steinspring in the 50s, the Steinspring dilation theorem,by increasing the dimension of your Hilbert space in a bounded way, for those who care, it's goingfrom an n-dimensional Hilbert space to an n-cubed dimensional Hilbert space at the most, which corresponds to adding one or two extra degrees of freedom. You can implement the evolution asunitary evolution anyway. And this is really cool because it means that even if you didn't startwith a special kind of indivisible, you start with a totally generic indivisible stochastic process, all it's saying is given the configuration of the system here, here's the probability distributionof where it will be later. When you run it through the stochastic quantum correspondence, get a Hilbert space picture, you go, oh no, it's a Hilbert space picture and I see a lot of stuff,but the evolution is not given by a unitary operator, it's not given by the Schrodinger equation, that's not great. It turns out with a simple change of representation, one second changeof representation, you can implement the evolution in a unitary way by what's called the dilation of the Hilbert space. And this gives, finally, an explanation of where unitarity comes from,where that axiom that the time evolution should be unitary, it emerges from this set of transformations. So it's really nice to be able to explain where these things come from. Andnow I can get to a question that came up from a couple of people in the comments. It seems like westarted with this indivisible stochastic process, we end up on this other side, and it kind of seemslike one basis for the Hilbert space is special, right? So a Hilbert space is a vector space, allof the objects, the state vectors are vectors, and people may know that a vector is a mathematicalobject. The simplest versions of vectors are arrows, let's take an arrow, an arrow pointing in some direction in space with some direction and some length. And if you draw a coordinate system,imagine an arrow on a graph paper, right? An arrow on graph paper, there's an x-axis and a y-axis,and you can ask, how far do we have to go along the x-axis and how far along do wehave to go along the y-axis to get from the bottom of the arrow to the top of the arrow? And the distance along the x-axis and the distance along the y-axis are called the components of thevector. It's got this x component and this y component, those are the components of the vector. But if I change my axes, if I like turn them a little bit, without changing the arrow,the arrow's the same but the axes have tilted, well then I have different distances now. I havea new distance, the x prime distance and the y prime distance, the new distances. So a singlevector has different component representations depending which basis you use. And the Hilbertspaces of quantum mechanics have this feature. In quantum mechanics, the different bases are associated with different kinds of things you might want to measure. So for example, if your vector is pointing exactly along a certain axis, it means that if you measure that observable, you're definitely going to get that result and definitely no other results. But if you measurea different observable, one whose axes are tilted, now your vector is not pointing exactly along that direction anymore. It's got some component along one axis and some component along another. And theBorn rule tells you how to take those components and compute probabilities. And so what we discover is that even if one observable has a definite result because the arrow is pointing exactly alongone axis, a different observable with different axes will give probabilistic results. And if yousomehow change your arrow so it's pointing along one of those axes, now the first observable will not have a definite result and this is just the uncertainty principle. That for certain pairs ofobservables when you know one with certainty, when measurements are guaranteed to yield a definite result for one of them with certainty, measurements are not guaranteed to yield definiteresults for the others with certainty. This is related to the ability to change bases. You may wonder, is this basis dependence preserved, this basis independence that I can take a vector andwrite it in any basis I want? But the answer is a lot like in Hamiltonian mechanics. We start witha physical system with an actual position and a particular momentum that has a clear meaning. It'sthe momentum, it's like for some systems it's mass times velocity. It's like a clear definition of momentum. We formulate it in this Hamiltonian phase space picture. But then we can do allthese weird canonical transformations where we can change variables and change what we mean by q and change what we mean by p. And all of a sudden it's not clear what the new q means, what the new pmeans. And you might go, well, Newtonian mechanics must be wrong because Newtonian mechanics didn'thave this independence. Newtonian mechanics picked out a particular q and p. But Hamiltonianmechanics treats them all like they're the same. There's this symmetry under changing your definition of q and p. This may just mean that Newtonian mechanics is wrong because it doesn'thave canonical transformation dependence. That's very analogous to what's going on here. It's truethat you start with a particular system in the indivisible stochastic side of the picture. The system has configurations. Those configurations correspond to a particular basis on the Hilbertspace side. Once you're on the Hilbert space side, now you have the freedom to change your basis however you want. But because the theory is mathematic, it's just a theorem. You can go fromone picture to the other. And this Hilbert space picture is mathematically a representation of the first picture. Just like in Hamiltonian classical mechanics, you have the freedom to do these basistransformations. They're totally available. The one lingering question you might ask now is,well, but can I measure other observable? The ones that were tied to the configurations areones that will be very simple to represent on the Hilbert space side. They correspond to what we call diagonal operators. What about all the other observables? The ones that are notdiagonal? The ones that don't commute with the first set? That correspond to these other bases, right? Those can also be measured. What's going on with those? And the answer is it's just like inBohmian mechanics. If you set your system up and couple it to a measuring device, and the measuringdevice could measure one of the beables, one of the ones that tightly corresponds to the originalconfigurations, it will passively reveal what the system had as that feature. But if you change yourmeasuring device, just pick up a quantum textbook, look at measurement, like how they formulatemeasurements in terms of unitary transformations. And just change your measuring device, now it's gonna measure a different property, measure one of the emergibles. You run the exact same process.The measuring device will stochastically end up in one of its measurement outcomes with the correctprobability given by the Born rule. It just comes out of the formalism. But the thing it's measuringis not a fundamental feature of the system. It's measuring really like an emergent pattern of the mutual dynamics of the system itself and the measuring device measuring it. Some properties,you're passively revealing what was already there. Those correspond to that special basis. And properties that don't correspond to the special basis can still be measured, and they'llstill produce results on measuring devices. And the measuring devices will still stochastically end up in their correct readout configurations with the correct probabilities. And as far asthe measuring device is concerned, it has measured something just as real as for a beable. But what it's really measured is one of these emergent patterns, these emergibles. And so from thepoint of view of the outside world, the emergibles are on the same footing as the beables. Together,the beables and the emergibles collectively form the full, we call it a non-commutative algebra ofobservables for the quantum system. So this deals with this question of basis dependence. And thisisn't new. So another way to formulate quantum mechanics is the path integral formulation. Sopeople may be familiar that there's this sort of Hilbert space formulation and there's this other formulation in which to predict probabilistically where the system will end up, you're supposedto somehow start with initial configuration and write down every candidate trajectory the systemcould have. All the trajectories, ones that do not satisfy the classical laws of physics,assign each of them a special numerical factor. Add all the factors together as this very trickyintegration called a functional integral. And get a complex number out that when you mod square it,do this particular operation on it, you get a probability. And you can reformulate quantum mechanics, at least at the level of making its predictions in this way. This path integralformulation goes back to Paul Dirac in a 1932 paper. I didn't know that. Paul Dirac was the first to introduce it. All the way down to like you slice up the time interval into little bitsand you introduce complete sets. It's a beautiful, beautiful paper. He was trying to understand what is the role of the Lagrangian. So before 1932, people had formulated quantum mechanics in thelanguage of Hamiltonians, in the language of Hamilton-Jacobi theory. And Dirac was just verycurious. He wanted to know, does the Lagrangian formulation show up in quantum mechanics also? And he found this very beautiful way to do it using these sort of functional integrals. ButDirac was just content to write it all out, like formally state everything, and not turn it into amachine for calculating things. Ten years later, Richard Feynman picked it up while he was a PhDstudent. And this was like in 1942, he was a PhD student at Princeton, also again a student of JohnWheeler. And he turned Dirac's formalism into an actual recipe for calculating things. And then afew years later, he ended up publishing a review article, talking in detail. And we can post all ofthese to the YouTube video if you want, or people can see all these papers. So a few years later, he wrote a review article about all of this. And he says at the beginning, there's nothing so farthat I can do with this that cannot be done with ordinary methods. You can imagine someone saying, well, then what good is it? If it only makes the same predictions as ordinary quantum mechanics andyou can't do anything with functional integrals or path integrals that you couldn't do with earlier methods, what use is it? And by the way, it also picks out a basis. Because to do the path integralformulation, you have to pick a basis. For example, when you do path integrals for particles, usually what you do is you pick positions. You pick what's called a position basis anddo everything with positions. You don't usually do the path integral in other bases, you can. But any particular choice of how you form a path integral picks out one basis. So you could say,this is basis dependent. You could say it doesn't do anything that we couldn't already do. It's aweird picture, and it was for a long time. And then eventually people discover there were some calculations that were just too hard to do in the traditional approach. Today, if you want to formulate a non-Abelian gauge theory, like a Yang-Mills theory, like QCD. You're probably notgoing to want to do it using the canonical Hilbert space approach. You're probably going to want to do it with the functional path integral approach. Eventually, and it took many years, I mean from1932 until when people really needed these decades for people to realize there were some things thatnow we can do much more easily with this new formalism. So of course, this gives me hope thatformulating quantum mechanics in a new way, not the Hilbert space way, not the path integral way,a new way. Even if it doesn't obviously do anything that you couldn't do otherwise,even if there aren't any obvious immediate applications as the sort of thing that may be 10, 15, who knows? Feynman himself said that any good theorist should know a bunch of differentways to do the same thing. Because when you formulate a theory in multiple different ways, you discover different knobs you can turn, different things you can do that might have been harder toimagine doing in one formulation that are easier to imagine doing in another formulation. So yeah,so that gets this sort of basis independence question. We can get to some of the other comments and questions people have had, but let me pause there and ask if you have questions before we go on.

-------------------------------------- Stop: 1:58:11 ---------------------------------------------------

Q6: Curt Jaimungal: Can you explain where unitarity comes from?

A6: Interviewee: Unitarity comes from a class of indivisible processes called unistochastic processes. These are exactly the processes that when you run them through the stochastic quantum correspondence, on the other side you end up with unitary evolution.

Q7: Curt Jaimungal: Can you explain the concept of a quantum channel?

A7: Interviewee: A quantum channel is also known as a linear, completely positive, trace-preserving map. These are well-studied in the quantum information literature. The mapping from the indivisible stochastic processes to the Hilbert space picture can be represented by a quantum channel.

Q8: Curt Jaimungal: Can you explain the concept of dilation of the Hilbert space?

A8: Interviewee: Dilation of the Hilbert space is a simple change of representation that allows you to implement the evolution in a unitary way. This gives an explanation of where unitarity comes from, where that axiom that the time evolution should be unitary, it emerges from this set of transformations.

Question: 
Curt Jaimungal: Let's see if I understand this correctly and I can simplify this. So Markovian, let's understand what Markovian means. This means your system, you look at the present state and you can determine the next state. Okay. When we say the present state, we tend to think, oh, Newtonian mechanics is Markovian because you say, well, let's specify the position and then maybe the mass and then the velocity as well now. But then you're saying, well, what is the velocity? It's actually the position just an infinitesimal time ago. So you could introduce a new variable called velocity, or you could just think of what the time is now and what the time was ago, making it non-Markovian because it's now no longer the present. This is equivalent, I believe, it's equivalent to Newtonian, the Newtonian formulation. But in what we're taught as the Newtonian formulation, you've introduced something new. So you're saying that, look, in that similar manner, we can make an analogy here where there's these indivisible stochastic processes, these little guys operating around here. What exactly are they? I'm going to ask you about that afterward, but they're operating here and they're stochastic. What about all of these? You're saying they correspond to quantum mechanics, how? Quantum mechanics is linearity, unitarity, superposition, interference. Are you suggesting that when we take this non-Markovian and we make it Markovian, that just as in the Newtonian case, we introduce something new, that we're introducing something new and those correspond to linearity, superposition, interference, and so on?

Answer: 
Interviewee: Yeah. Yeah. And complex structure and the ability to change bases and all this stuff, they all, it's exactly right. It's exactly right.

Question: 
Curt Jaimungal: So now the question that the audience has or had is how do you deal with interference experiments? Also, we can get to it in order, if you like, Bell, what does it say about the Bell's inequality and what are the beables exactly in this framework, this formulation?

Answer: 
Interviewee: Let me start with the interference experiment ones. Let's start there. So the simplest answer to that question is if there's a mathematical duality or representation that takes you from an indivisible stochastic process to this Hilbert space picture, and let me just quickly say, the mapping is not one-to-one. It's many-to-many. A given indivisible stochastic process may have many Hilbert space representations and a given Hilbert space representation can represent many different indivisible stochastic processes, but this is not new. The same relationship holds for Newtonian systems and Hamiltonian formulation. A single Newtonian system can have multiple different Hamiltonian formulations and a single Hamiltonian formulation can represent many different Newtonian systems. So this is not like a new thing. Okay. But the point is that these indivisible systems do have this representation in this sort of Hilbert space picture, and the representation is just math. I mean, every Hilbert space picture can be regarded as an indivisible stochastic system in disguise and vice versa. So any predictions you make with a Hilbert space picture are going to be preserved. The explanation though is going to be different. So let's take the double slit experiment, and this is actually going to be helpful because I think one question someone had was, can I give a hello world example? You know, computer programming, the simplest program you write is something that just prints hello world. What's the simplest example I can give? I'll give you a simple example. Let's consider a double slit experiment.

**Question:** How useful is philosophy to physics, especially the parts that are not super connected to math and physics?

**Answer:** A lot of people often think about the parts of philosophy that are not super connected to math and physics. However, many of these people would say that Bursch and Russell, who were analytic philosophers, had a good thing to say about physics. They were like one of the towering analytic philosophers. The early people who developed quantum physics and quantum mechanics were deeply enmeshed in philosophy. 

**Question:** Can you talk about the relationship between philosophy and physics in the early 20th century?

**Answer:** There was an incredible amount of cross-pollination between the analytic philosophers of the early 20th century and physicists. Physicists themselves were thoroughly trained in philosophy. For example, Albert Einstein was doing a lot of philosophy. He'd read Kant's Three Critiques by age 16. When he went to university, there were mandatory courses in philosophy of science. Both at the university and then after he left university, he ran a philosophy of science reading club. He was deeply immersed in Spinoza. He was very inspired by Ernst Mach. He even wrote an obituary for Ernst Mach in which he talks about the importance of epistemology. He says, the ablest students, the ones who are most independent of thought, are the ones who took epistemology the most seriously. 

**Question:** What is the importance of philosophy in creating new breakthroughs in physics?

**Answer:** The people who gave us the biggest revolutions in modern physics, quantum theory and relativity, were all either deep, strongly connected to philosophers, or they were interacting with philosophers, or they were philosophers, or they were at least very thoroughly trained in philosophy. If you were trying to create new breakthroughs in physics, wouldn't you take that as an example? We need people who are thoroughly trained in physics and thoroughly trained in philosophy so that they don't say nonsense things. So they actually make meaningful contributions and help bring these two disciplines together. 

**Question:** What is the role of philosophy in fostering independence and precision of thought?

**Answer:** Philosophy trains you to have independence of thought and precision of thought. In philosophy seminars, especially in philosophy of science or philosophy of physics or analytic philosophy, the level of precision in your language is high. If you say something that is not very carefully stated, people will immediately say, I'm sorry, that's too vague. And you like precisify that. Because you don't have the ability to rely on empirical data, you rely on the strength of your logical reasoning in a very significant way. 

**Question:** How does the culture of philosophy seminars differ from that of physics seminars?

**Answer:** In philosophy seminars, what often happens is you'll have a talk, half hour, 45 minutes, sometimes they go an hour, then there's a break. People go and they take five minutes, they get refreshments, they come back, and then there's like an hour of discussion. The discussion is often the most interesting part of the seminar. And because there's like an hour, everybody asks questions, the students ask questions, because no one is afraid they're asking the one question. No one's afraid they're going to look bad because there's going to be 10 more questions after their question. And people can really have a substantive discussion and dialogue. 

**Question:** How can the precision of language in philosophy be brought to bear in physics?

**Answer:** I think the precision of language in philosophy could be brought to bear in how we do physics more than we currently do it. We need to hold people accountable, have extended like discussion, really get to the deep parts of people's ideas, not letting people get away with slogans.